feat: Restructure AIPs 213 and 215, with more common proto details (#1117)
googleapis/aip: aip/general/0213.md

# Common components

As specified in [AIP-215][], APIs must be self-contained except for "common
protos" which are intended for use by multiple APIs.

There are two kinds of common protos:

- Organization-specific common protos, covering organization-specific concepts
  such as a "viewport" in Maps.
- Global common protos which are not domain-specific, such as "timestamp" or
  "postal address".

Where it is safe to share a single representation across multiple APIs,
common protos can make it easier for clients to interact with those APIs.
Concept-specific client code can be written once, and messages can be used from
the response of one API in the request of another without clunky copying, for
example.

This benefit comes with significant restrictions and limitations, however,
and should not be attempted lightly.

## Guidance

- Organization-wide common proto packages **must** end with `.type`, e.g.
  `google.geo.type` or `google.shopping.type`.
- Organizations **must** consult the API design team before creating a new
  organization-wide common proto package.

> - Organizations **must not** define generic protos in organization-specific

Reviewer: How generic is "generic"?  This seems underspecified.

When I was at Google, we made google.actions.type.DateRange and google.actions.type.Measurement, because we expected to need them and the Apiness team didn't want to adopt them into google.type (unlike DateTime, which I did get adopted into google.type).

That example aside...what if I want to create an organization-specific common proto that makes sense for exactly two organizations within Google?

Author: It'll always be a gray area... basically hidden behind the hand-waving of "consult the API design team".

Reviewer: That makes sense in practice, but the way this is currently worded, it sounds like creating `google.actions.type.DateRange` would be forbidden.

Author: I'll try to add a bit more color here then.

>   common protos, instead preferring global common protos.

Reviewer: > ...**must not**  define...protos...in...protos

Something about this wording feels off.  Maybe "organization-specific packages" rather than "organization-specific protos"?

Author: Will go over that at the same time as looking at protos/components.

- Common protos **must not** be "moved" from an organization-specific common
  proto package to a global common package or vice versa.
- Fields **should not** be added to existing messages.
- Values **should not** be added to existing enums.
- Fields **must not** be removed from existing messages.
- Values **must not** be removed from existing enums.
- While documentation **may** be clarified, it **should not** change the set

>   of valid values for any given field or change the meanings of existing values.

Reviewer: "for any given field" might be too specific.  It would be a problem to change the set of valid combinations of set/unset fields in google.type.Date, right?  Even if each field still had the same range of valid values?

Author: Correct, yes. Will reword.

As specified in [AIP-215][], APIs must be self-contained except for "common
protos" which are intended for use by multiple APIs.

There are two kinds of common protos:

- Organization-specific common protos, covering organization-specific concepts
  such as a "viewport" in Maps.
- Global common protos which are not domain-specific, such as "timestamp" or
  "postal address".

Where it is safe to share a single representation across multiple APIs,
common protos can make it easier for clients to interact with those APIs.
Concept-specific client code can be written once, and messages can be used from
the response of one API in the request of another without clunky copying, for
example.

This benefit comes with significant restrictions and limitations, however,
and should not be attempted lightly.

## Guidance

- Organization-wide common proto packages **must** end with `.type`, e.g.
  `google.geo.type` or `google.shopping.type`.
- Organizations **must** consult the API design team before creating a new
  organization-wide common proto package.
- Organizations **must not** define generic protos in organization-specific
  common protos, instead preferring global common protos.

> - Common protos **must not** be "moved" from an organization-specific common

Reviewer 2: what if what was originally thought to be an organization-specific concept ends up being more globally applicable? e.g. other organizations would like to use it. Would each organization duplicate the original organization-specific proto?

Author: Either each org could duplicate it, *or* we could add it to the global common protos, but with the original organization having to stick with their own copy - at least for existing fields. (Perhaps use the new global proto for new APIs, but stick with the org-specific one for all existing APIs using it? Both options are a bit messy.)

Given that this isn't a great experience either way, we should try to avoid getting into this mess - suggestions for processes to help on that front would be welcome!

Reviewer: If the type "graduates" to google.type, and remains wire-compatible (serialized proto and JSON), what's the problem with switching to the new copy of the type in google.type?

Author: It's a breaking change for API libraries in statically-typed languages, because the type would be different. Removing it from the org-specific common library would also be a breaking change, as removing public types always is.

The latter breaking change is the big problem, as a new major version of the org-specific common library requires a new major version of all API libraries depending on it.

Basically there are ways this could just about be done, but it's a *lot* of work - much better to really take the time to work out global/org-specific first. (The DateRange one earlier is a good example of a gray area... we *may* have got that wrong, but it's unclear. It's not obviously org-specific in that date ranges themselves are quite general - but the detailed requirements of the type around precision, inclusivity etc are org-specific.)

Reviewer: If I have an API client that expects `google.shoe.type.ShoeSize` and the server is updated to use a graduated `google.type.ShoeSize`...why would my client break? 

I agree that a generated GAPIC in a statically typed language would contain a breaking change when regenerated after the switch to the graduated type, but that seems distinct from a breaking change in the API itself.  Client code that isn't updated at all would keep working, right?

Author: > I agree that a generated GAPIC in a statically typed language would contain a breaking change when regenerated after the switch to the graduated type

And that's what I'm talking about.

> that seems distinct from a breaking change in the API itself.

We've always included "that would cause a breaking change in client libraries" as a breaking change, and I'd want to keep doing so. AIP-180 explicitly calls that out with 3 kinds of compatibility - this would be compatible with item 2 and 3 there, but not with item 1.

> Client code that isn't updated at all would keep working, right?

Yes, unless the type is used as an "Any". But there's more to compatibility than "existing code against existing libraries keeps working".

Reviewer: Yeah fair enough - since AIP-180's item 1 is explicitly includes newer versions of client libraries, that's that I suppose.

Reviewer: (Not resolving this thread since I didn't start it, but FWIW, it's resolved as far as I'm concerned.)

Author: @toumorokoshi: Are you happy to resolve this now?

  proto package to a global common package or vice versa.
- Fields **should not** be added to existing messages.
- Values **should not** be added to existing enums.
- Fields **must not** be removed from existing messages.
- Values **must not** be removed from existing enums.
- While documentation **may** be clarified, it **should not** change the set
  of valid values for any given field or change the meanings of existing values.
- New proto messages and enums **may** be added to common proto packages.

>   - API teams **should** be aware that it may take some time for any changes
>     to propagate through publication to client libraries and other surfaces,
>     and **should** allow sufficient time for this to happen before using the new
>     messages and enums in their APIs.

Reviewer 2: This first "should" doesn't feel actionable. I might consider some wording that focuses on the action:

```suggestion
  - API teams  **should** allow sufficient time for propagation to clients before using the new
    messages and enums in their APIs. Fields may take some time for any changes
    to propagate through publication to client libraries and other surfaces.
```

Author: Works for me, thanks.

As specified in [AIP-215][], APIs must be self-contained except for the use
of "common component" packages which are intended for use by multiple APIs.

There are two kinds of common component packages:

- Organization-specific common components, covering organization-specific
  concepts such as a "viewport" in Maps.
- Global common componnts which are not domain-specific, such as "timestamp" or
  "postal address".

Where it is safe to share a single representation across multiple APIs,
common components can make it easier for clients to interact with those APIs.
Concept-specific client code can be written once, and messages can be used from
the response of one API in the request of another without clunky copying, for
example.

This benefit comes with significant restrictions and limitations, however,
and should not be attempted lightly.

## Guidance

- Organization-wide common component packages **must** end with `.type`, e.g.
  `google.geo.type` or `google.shopping.type`.
- Organizations **must** consult the API design team before creating a new
  organization-wide common component package.
- Organizations **must not** define generic components in organization-specific

>   common component packages, instead preferring global common components.

Reviewer: I think the previous commit where I commented may have gotten rebased away; not sure what the right way to keep that thread alive is on GitHub.  So I'll just quote my other comment, since I think it still applies:

> ...the way this is currently worded, it sounds like creating `google.actions.type.DateRange` would be forbidden.

Author: The intention is that this is covered in the new rationale paragraph:

> Consultation with the API design team is required for global common components
> and suggested for organization-specific common components as the border between
> "generic" and "organization-specific" is a gray area; some generic *concepts*
> have organization-specific use cases which surface through the components.

Reviewer: I think the text you quoted sounds good, but A) not sure how discoverable it is; and B) I still think this guidance could be weakened a bit in order not to forbid stuff that is actually sometimes encouraged.

Author: I don't have much sympathy for anyone who can't be bothered to read the rationale section :) When viewing the page itself (rather than the source in a diff) it's literally just inches away.

But this isn't forbidding anything that is "actually sometimes encouraged" - it's just that "generic component" has nuance. My understanding is that the guidance section is intended to be short bullet points without too much motivational detail.

I've added an example in the general description just before the guidance section - see if that allays your concerns.

Reviewer: It's not just about people not reading the whole thing - it's about the AIPs as citable authorities.  If this text had existed when I made google.actions.type.DateRange, a reviewer could reasonably have cited it in order to prevent the CL from being approved.

Counter-quoting the rationale section ("some generic *concepts* have organization-specific use cases which surface through the components."), or the example above (which says something similar) would have been questionable at best, especially given that I don't think there was anything AoG-specific about google.actions.type.DateRange.  IIRC, the reason not to put it in google.type was just that the Apiness team wanted to see broader usage within google3 before adopting any assumptions about details like date ranges always being inclusive on both ends (e.g. "from 1/1 until 1/3" always including all three days).

How do you feel about the below modification?

```suggestion
- Organizations **must not** define generic components in organization-specific
  common component packages, instead preferring global common components,
  without explicit permission from the API governance team.
```

Or if not that, then maybe at least this?

```suggestion
- Organizations **must not** define generic components in organization-specific
  common component packages, instead preferring global common components.
  - When there are questions about whether a component qualifies as "generic", please [open an issue][].
```

Anyway, I'm not at Google anymore, and I certainly don't want to block broad improvements to these AIPs based on my opinion on Google's internal process and organization - so if you are still not persuaded then I leave it to you/@toumorokoshi  to figure out the best path forward.  But for the generic AIPs I would probably continue to argue that this guidance, as written, is too strong.

Reviewer 2: I think to clarify: generic AIPs and Google AIPs are not the same thing. So high-level some divergence is allowed. I'd say around "policy" like this especially there's leeway, in contrast to more specific guidance around the schema or behavior of APIs.

> the way this is currently worded, it sounds like creating google.actions.type.DateRange would be forbidden.

I don't really interpret it this way, personally. But we can always change the wording if it's confusing.

I've already approved this PR a while back so I was comfortable with the content then, and my LGTM doesn't change now.

Author: Thanks folks.

Creating an issue in this repo would rarely be the right approach - consulting with the API design team internally is. I think "if you want an exception to this, consult with the API design team" is effectively the rule anyway, so I don't think we need to highlight it in this particular example.

Will resolve this conversation now, as @toumorokoshi is okay with how it is. If it turns out that this isn't clear enough, I'm definitely happy to amend it further later.

Reviewer 3: The difficulty I have here is that the term "generic" is not defined at this point. (i.e. it seems approximately synonymous with "common", but that doesn't make the statement meaningful.) So when reading the AIP for the first time, I get stuck at this bullet point because I can't make head or tail of what it means. Yes, the term "generic" is later referenced in the rationale section, but only indirectly. It would help if the term could be defined in the intro section above. I think that would be fairly straightforward.

In the rationale section, it is implied that "generic" is to be seen in contrast to "organization-specific", i.e. as the "other" of the two kinds of common components. So we could modify the bullet point above in line 19 to say something like:

```
- Global common components which are generic, i.e. not domain-specific, such as
  "timestamp" or "postal address".
```

Author: Fab - I've put "i.e. not domain-specific" in brackets, but otherwise I've taken your suggestion - thanks!

# Common components

As specified in [AIP-215][], APIs must be self-contained except for the use
of "common component" packages which are intended for use by multiple APIs.

There are two kinds of common component packages:

- Organization-specific common components, covering organization-specific
  concepts such as a "viewport" in Maps.

> - Global common componnts which are not domain-specific, such as "timestamp" or

Reviewer 4: typo: `componnts`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Global common components which are not domain-specific, such as "timestamp" or
```

Author: Thanks both :)

Concept-specific client code can be written once, and messages can be used from
the response of one API in the request of another without clunky copying, for
example.

This benefit comes with significant restrictions and limitations, however,
and should not be attempted lightly.

Note that even if the *domain* of a component is common, the requirements of
a component may be organization-specific. For example, some organizations may
have particular requirements of how financial values are represented, leading
to multiple finance-oriented organization-specific common components - because
any global common component would either not meet the organization-specific
requirements, or be too complex for general use.

## Guidance

- Organization-wide common component packages **must** end with `.type`, e.g.
  `google.geo.type` or `google.shopping.type`.
- Organizations **must** consult the API design team before creating a new
  organization-wide common component package.
- Organizations **must not** define generic components in organization-specific
  common component packages, instead preferring global common components.

> - Common components **must not** be "moved" from an organization-specific common

Reviewer 2: I think it'd be nice to define "move" a bit more here - is completely copying the proto not allowed? if not, what happens when a concept does become common across multiple protos?

Author: Added clarification, and a "may" for copy-without-removal.

    and other surfaces.
  - API teams **should** consult widely within their organization, and ideally
    with the API design team, before adding a new message or enum, due to the
    limitations listed above.

## Rationale

Common components are effectively unversioned: APIs evolve independently of
each other, both in terms of definition and implementation. A change such as
adding a field is backward-compatible and predictable in specific APIs, and the
API team can ensure that the server implementation is available before the API
definition is published. By contrast, a change in a common component would
effectively be universally available even if most API implementations did not
take it into account.

Adding a new message or enum is backward-compatible, as it does not affect
existing APIs that may import other messages or enums from the same common
component package.

Consultation with the API design team is required for global common components
and suggested for organization-specific common components as the border between
"generic" and "organization-specific" is a gray area; some generic *concepts*
have organization-specific use cases which surface through the components.

> ## Existing global common components

Reviewer 5: I'd love to see a section for `## Existing organization-wide common components` as well. I understand that this runs the risk of going out of date, but it would still be very helpful to categorize the ones that exist today for reference.

Author: Okay - I'm basically on vacation now until next week, and I'd like to get this merged before then if possible, but I can definitely take this as an action item for next week.

Reviewer 5: SGTM! Added an issue to follow up https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/issues/1142

> ## Existing global common components

Reviewer 2: This section should be moved above rationale (rationale should be at the bottom, so succinct guidance floats to the top while long explanations are at the bottom for reference.

Author: Done.

Occasionally, it may be useful to add protos to these packages or to add to the
list of commonly-available protos. In order to do this, [open an issue][] on
the AIP repository in GitHub, noting the guidelines above.

## Changelog

- 2023-05-XX: Restructured AIPs 215 and 213 for clarity, and introduced the

>   concept of organization-wide common protos more formally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  concept of organization-wide common protos more formally.
```

Author: Done, here and in the other AIP.
